---
layout: book_post
title: "Lab Girl"
date: 2018-05-27 17:18
categories:
tags: [book, nonfiction, life, role-model, memoir]
author: Hope Jahren
rating: 2
length_pages: 290
length_loc: 4524
date_started: 2018-05-09
date_finished: 2018-05-21
goodreads_url: "https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/25733983-lab-girl"
image: /books/lab-girl.jpg
summary: "Memoir of a female plant biologist from Minnesota with a one-track mind for science. No BS."
---

*TL;DR*: Hope has always known that she was meant to be a scientist.
Being a woman, it hasn't always been easy, but her work has always kept
her going. She has an incredible persistence in the face of adversity
that has gotten her to where she is today. Good storytelling, bit
unrelatable to me, but that's okay I'm not who she wrote it for.

## Notes/Snippets

<blockquote>
  <p>
    <b>There is no shame in breaking something, only in not being able to
    fix it.</b> (8)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    People are like plants: they grow toward the light. I chose science
    because science gave me what I needed--a home as defined in the most
    literal sense: a safe place to be. (18)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    My lab is a place where my guilt over what I haven't done is
    supplanted by all of the things that I am getting done. [...] My lab
    is a place where I can be the child that I still am. [...] My lab is
    like a church because it is where I figure out what I believe. [...]
    I know damn well that <b>if there had been a way to get to success
    without traveling through disaster someone would have already done
    it</b>, but there's still no journal where I can tell the story of how
    my science is done with both the heart and the hands. (19)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    Science has taught me that everything is more complicated than we
    first assume, and that <b>being able to derive happiness from discovery
    is a recipe for a beautiful life</b>. It has also convinced me that
    <b>carefully writing everything down is the only real defense we have
    against forgetting something important</b> that once was and is no more.
    (29)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    The inescapable cube shape of salt persists because the very atoms
    that comprise pure salt are bonded together in the shape of a square
    scaffold that outlines an endless number of cubes. Any break to this
    structure will occur along the planes of weakness that define these
    bonds, resulting in more cubes, all repeating the same atomic
    pattern right down to their smallest components. (69)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    On some deep level, the realization that I could do good science was
    accompanied by the knowledge that <b>I had formally and terminally
    missed my chance to become like any of the woman that I had every
    known.</b> (71) [Tiger: echoes similar feelings about working at PayPal
    after high school]
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    "Anything except that NPR shit. I don't want to get all worked up
    over the plight of fishermen in some place that I can't even find on
    the map. I got my own problems right here." (82)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    The whole place is different on a Friday at midnight, when the
    university belongs to you. Smug in the presumption that you are the
    only working person within a fifty-mile radius, you accomplish just
    enough to feel justified in being naughty. In the rhythm of these
    Friday nights beats the honest, humble heart of science, and it also
    explains how <b>discovery and mischief are two sides of the very same
    coin.</b> (100) [Tiger: I freaking love this.]
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    Bill complains about each student with uniformly wicked contempt and
    then spends yet another day rescuing them from themselves. (111)
    [Tiger: bq is that you?]
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    "<b>'What if? Fuck 'what if'.</b> None of that shit will change anything!"
    Bill hollered. "What if you don't get a grant? You can't exactly pay
    me less than you do now [...] You just keep putting on that power
    suit and hawk our wares at those interviews, and get us out of here
    for God's sake. If we built this shit once, we can build it twice."
    (172). [Tiger: get you someone like Bill :)]
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    Hardening has worked for eons because a tree can trust the sun to
    tell it when winter is coming, even during years when the weather is
    capricious. These plants know that when your world is changing
    rapidly, it is important to have identified the one thing that you
    can always count upon. (191)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    There are two ways to deal with a major setback: one is to pause,
    take a deep breath, clear your mind and go home, distraact yourself
    for the evening, and come back fresh the next day to start over. The
    other is to immediately resubmerge, put your head under and dive to
    the bottom, work an hour longer than you did last night, and stay in
    the moment of what went wrong. While the first way is a good path
    toward adequacy, it is the second way that leads to important
    discoveries. (252) [Tiger: wouldn't quite agree...think it's
    case-by-case and sometimes you can do more harm than good by diving
    back in]
  </p>
</blockquote>
