---
layout: book_post
title: Shoe Dog
date: 2018-04-16 06:48
categories:
tags: [book, nonfiction, memoir, funny, sports]
author: Phil Knight
rating: 5
length_pages: 386
length_loc: 5480
date_started: 2018-04-07
date_finished: 2018-04-15
goodreads_url: "https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/27220736-shoe-dog"
image: /books/shoe-dog.jpg
summary: "Tons of great stories and actionable takeaways from the founding and
growth story of Nike, right from the source. Really, really good."
---

*TL;DR*: Phil "Buck" Knight has a Crazy Idea :tm: after graduating from
Stanford business school. The trials he has to go through, and his
response to them, make for a riveting story.

## Notes

* **_resilience_** is the overarching theme of this narrative.
  Resilience in the face of mistakes, failure, just keeping on keeping
  on.
* Respect for writing this himself! I don't think his voice or his story
  could have been told better by anyone else.
* Really felt all of the characters. Felt their individual
  personalities, expressed through very well-written anecdotes, and
  especially felt Buck's deep relationships with all of them.
* So many great nuggets of wisdom sprinkled around the book. I love the
  narrative voice.
* Leadership lessons: lead by example. Be firm but empathetic. You are
  not above reproach.

## Snippets

<blockquote>
  <p>
    That morning in 1962 I told myself: Let everyone else call your
    idea crazy...just <b>keep going. Don't stop. Don't even think about
    stopping until you get there</b>, and don't give much thought to where
    "there" is. Whatever comes, just don't stop. [...] Half a century
    later, I believe it's the best advice -- maybe the only advice --
    any of us should ever give. (L82)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    He was easy to talk to, and easy not to talk to -- equally important
    qualities in a friend. (L186)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    Don't tell people how to do things, tell them what to do and let
    them surprise you with their results. (L501)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    Bowerman's strategy for running the mile was simple. <b>Set a fast pace
    for the first two laps, run the third as hard as you can, then
    triple your speed on the fourth.</b> (L713)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    I'd been slightly better at selling mutual funds, but I'd felt dead
    inside. So why was selling shoes so different? Because, I realized,
    I wasn't selling. I <i>believed</i> in running. [...] People,
    sensing my belief, wanted some of that belief for themselves.
    Belief, I decided. Belief is irresistible. (L775)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    Hayes was to the numbers born. [...] He looked at numbers the way
    the poet looks at clouds, the way the geologist looks at rocks. He
    could draw from them rhapsodic song, demotic truths. And uncanny
    predictions. Hayes could use numbers to tell the future. (L1167)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    There are team players, I thought, and then there are _team players_,
    and then there's Johnson. (1508)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    No one could get your blood going like Bowerman, though he never
    raised his voice. He know how to speak in subliminal italics, to
    slyly insert exclamation marks, like hot keys against the flesh.
    (1605)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    Imagine that, I thought. <b>The single easiest way to find out how you
    feel about someone. Say goodbye.</b> (1822)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    Life is growth. You grow or you die. (2058)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    He denied, fumed, bargained, got depressed, then accepted. The Five
    Stages of Jeff. (3603) [I love the narrative voice in this book.
    This is just one example.]
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    Somebody may beat me--but they're going to have to bleed to do it.
    (3921)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    [Buttface] not only captured the informal mood of those retreats,
    where no idea was too sacred to be ridiculed, it also summed up the
    company spirit, mission and ethos. (4191)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    It was us against the world, and we felt damned sorry for the world.
    (4260)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    The cowards never started and the weak died along the way. That
    leaves us. (5016)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    Mr. Hayami nodded. "See those bamboo trees up there?" he asked [...]
    <b>"Next year...when you come...they will be one foot higher"</b> (5326)
    [w.r.t. training managers internally]
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    The better [you] get, the bigger the bull's-eye. It's not one man's
    opinion; it's a law of nature. (5380)
  </p>
</blockquote>
