---
layout: article_post
title: "Ask HN: What do you do in your 1-on-1s with your direct reports?"
date: "2018-10-31 12:22"
categories:
tags: [article, nonfiction, practices, startups, business]
author: hacker news
rating: 2
article_url: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=18264245
reading_time: 25
date_published: 2018-10-17
summary: "Wisdom of the crowd for 1-on-1s"
---

## Notes

This seems to work for me:

1. This is your time to talk about whatever is on your mind. If you want to talk
   about the footy over the weekend, that's fine. If you want to talk about work
   or issues at home or career progression, that's fine.
2. Sometimes there is not much to talk about - and that's fine too. If they do
   not have much to say on a particular day and I don't have much to say, it's a
   short meeting.
3. As said previously, try never to reschedule and never, never forget.
4. It's a really good time as a manager to practice listening. For that reason,
   I never have an agenda (i.e. things I want to say) at these meetings. Also, I
   try to contain the impulse to give advice unless they specifically ask for
   it.
5. I make it quite clear that as far as legally possible, I will maintain
   confidentiality. The only time that something may be relayed upward is if
   there is requirement for me to do so (e.g. an employee reporting
   harassment).

From Manager Tools Podcast:

1. Have a 1x1 once a week with each direct for 30 min
2. If you can have your 1x1 walking (go for coffee, head outside) try and do
   that; conversation flows easier when it's not in a confined space like a
   meeting room.
3. Loosely allocate the meeting in 1/2: 15 min for them to talk about whatever
   they want. 15 min for you to talk about what you need to talk about (usually
   top->down information), and at least leave a few min at the end for career
   development or tactics.
4. Throw out rule #3 if they want to talk more than 15 min. Always cut your
   portion down to accommodate them. The point of the meeting is to build trust.
   Building trust means listening to your directs and getting to know them and
   what makes them tick. You'll always learn more by listening than instructing.
