---
layout: book_post
title: Draft No. 4
date: 2019-01-04 00:01
categories:
tags: [book, nonfiction, writing, advice, life]
author: John McPhee
rating: 2
length_pages: 192
length_loc: 2693
date_started: 2018-12-24
date_finished: 2019-01-04
goodreads_url: "https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/18194765-draft-no-4"
image: /books/draft-no-4.jpg
summary: "Master-class on long-form nonfiction writing (books, newspaper articles), with personal narrative interspersed. Not super applicable to me (editors, publishers, etc.) but extremely well-written and engaging nontheless."
---

*TL;DR*: Nonfiction version of On Writing

* Good source of perceptual exposure options for narrative writing

## Notes

### Progression

* _so sound asleep that his mouth fell open wider than a golf ball._ (12)

### Structure

* _Then, as I do now, I settled on an ending before going back to the
  beginning._ (19)
* _Readers are not supposed to notice the structure. It is meant to be about as
  visible as someone's bones. And I hope this structure illustrates what I take
  to be a basic criterion for all structures: they should not be imposed upon
  the material. They should arise from within it._ (34)
* _A piece of writing has to start somewhere, go somewhere, and sit down when it
  gets there. You do that by building what you hope is an unarguable structure.
  Beginning, middle, end. Aristotle, page 1._ (34)
* _You should always write your lead [...] before you go at the big pile of raw
  material and sort it into a structure._ (49)
* _The lead--like the title--should be a flashlight that shines down into the
  story. A lead is a promise. It promises that the piece of writing is going to
  be like this. If it is not going to be so, don't use the lead._ (50)

### Editors & Publisher

### Elicitation

* _Whatever you do, don't rely on memory._ (94)
* _Do enough preparation to be polite_ (97)

### Frame of Reference

* _The last thing I would ever suggest to young writers is that they consciously
  try to write for the ages. Oh, yik, disgusting. Nobody should ever be trying
  that. We should just be hoping that our pieces aren't obsolete before the
  editor sees them. If you look for allusions and images that have some
  durability, your choices will stabilize your piece of writing. Don't assume
  that everyone on earth has seen every movie you have seen._ (118)

### Checkpoints

### Draft No. 4

* Combat writer's block: write "Dear Mother", go with what comes to mind, snip
  off the salutation
* _After reading the second draft aloud, and going through the piece for the
  third time, I enclose words and phrases in pencilled boxes for Draft No. 4. If
  I enjoy anything in this process it is Draft No. 4._ (161)
  * Titular
* _The dictionary definitions of words you are trying to replace are far more
  likely to help you out than a scattershot wad from a thesaurus._ (162)

### Omission

* _An instantly likable guy if the instant had not been this one._ (179)
  * Great writing
